Add a walkthrough to setup Lighthouse with Tekton (#1683)
tektoncd/dashboard: docs/walkthrough/walkthrough-lighthouse.md

* [Creating a GitHub OAuth token](#creating-a-github-oauth-token)
* [Preparing your environment](#preparing-your-environment)
* [Installing Lighthouse](#installing-lighthouse)
* [Configuring Lighthouse](#configuring-Lighthouse)
* [Configuring GitHub to send events to Lighthouse](#configuring-github-to-send-events-to-lighthouse)
* [Configuring Lighthouse jobs](#configuring-lighthouse-jobs)
* [Lighthouse running jobs when opening a pull request](#lighthouse-running-jobs-when-opening-a-pull-request)
* [Cleaning up](#cleaning-up)

## Before you begin

Before you begin, make sure the following tools are installed:

1. [`kind`](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/): For creating a local cluster running on top of docker.
1. [`kubectl`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/): For interacting with your kubernetes cluster.
1. [`helm`](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/): For installing helm charts in your kubernetes cluster.

You will also need a [GitHub](https://github.com/) account and a [ngrok](https://ngrok.com/) to complete this walkthrough.

## What is Lighthouse

From the [Lighthouse GitHub page](https://github.com/jenkins-x/lighthouse):

> > Lighthouse is a lightweight ChatOps based webhook handler which can trigger Jenkins X Pipelines and soon Tekton Pipelines based on webhooks from multiple git providers such as: GitHub, GitHub Enterprise, BitBucket Server, BitBucket Cloud, GitLab, Gitea etc

Reviewer: `s/and soon Tekton Pipelines/and Tekton Pipelines/`, and I'd remove the `BitBucket Cloud` and `Gitea` from the list - thanks for reminding me that Lighthouse's README needs to be updated... =)

Author: fixed, thanks

* [Configuring GitHub to send events to Lighthouse](#configuring-github-to-send-events-to-lighthouse)
* [Configuring Lighthouse jobs](#configuring-lighthouse-jobs)
* [Lighthouse running jobs when opening a pull request](#lighthouse-running-jobs-when-opening-a-pull-request)
* [Cleaning up](#cleaning-up)

## Before you begin

Before you begin, make sure the following tools are installed:

1. [`kind`](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/): For creating a local cluster running on top of docker.
1. [`kubectl`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/): For interacting with your kubernetes cluster.
1. [`helm`](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/): For installing helm charts in your kubernetes cluster.

You will also need a [GitHub](https://github.com/) account and a [ngrok](https://ngrok.com/) to complete this walkthrough.

## What is Lighthouse

From the [Lighthouse GitHub page](https://github.com/jenkins-x/lighthouse):

> Lighthouse is a lightweight ChatOps based webhook handler which can trigger Jenkins X Pipelines and Tekton Pipelines based on webhooks from multiple git providers such as: GitHub, GitHub Enterprise, BitBucket Server, GitLab

> That is, Lighthouse brings ChatOps over a repository so that you can interact with a bot by writing comments over pull requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is, Lighthouse brings ChatOps to a repository so that you can interact with a bot by writing comments on pull requests.
```

> In addtion, it receives webhooks and triggers jobs to be executed according to the received changes, it then reports the job execution status and can merge pull requests automatically when all jobs succeed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, it receives webhooks and triggers jobs to be executed according to the received changes, it then reports the job execution status and can merge pull requests automatically when all jobs succeed.
```

> Lighthouse is part of the jenkins-x platform but can be deployed in stand alone and plugged with Tekton pipelines easily.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lighthouse is part of the jenkins-x platform but can be deployed stand-alone and plugged with Tekton pipelines easily.
```

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Connections                   ttl     opn     rt1     rt5     p50     p90                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                              1       0       0.00    0.00    75.24   75.24                                                                                                                                                                                                     
```

From the output above, `https://683b6874e9b9.ngrok.io` is the endpoint where GitHub can send events. You will use this endpoint to set up your Lighthouse ingress.

## Creating a GitHub OAuth token

> Before installing Lighthouse, you will need to create a OAuth token on your GitHub account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before installing Lighthouse, you will need to create an OAuth token on your GitHub account.
```

This OAuth token will be used by Lighthouse to perform various actions against your GitHub repository like merging pull requests, reporting job status or sending comments.

To create the OAuth token on GitHub, browse https://github.com/settings/tokens and click the `Generate new token` button.

Fill in the form and click the `Register token` button:

> - `Note`: put whatever let's you remember how this token is used (`lighthouse` might be a good hint)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `Note`: put whatever helps you remember how this token is used (`lighthouse` might be a good hint)
```

- tick the `repo` checkbox

![Creating a GitHub Oauth token](./walkthrough-lighthouse-create-token.png)

Once the token is created, GitHub should show you the generated OAuth token, please note it as you will need it later to install and configure Lighthouse.

![Creating a GitHub Oauth token](./walkthrough-lighthouse-oauth-token.png)

> **NOTE:** for those curious people, this token is not valid anymore ;-)

Reviewer 2: 😆

## Preparing your environment

In this step you will define a few environment variables that will be reused in the other steps below.

> Those environment variables will hold information related to the GitHub org/repo you want to connect with Lighthouse and the necessary information to let Lighthouse authenticate with GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These environment variables will hold information related to the GitHub org/repo you want to connect with Lighthouse and the necessary information to let Lighthouse authenticate with GitHub.
```

The variables, their use, and how to obtain them is detailed below:

| variable | use | provenance |
| -------- | --- | ---------- |
| USER | used by Lighthouse to interact with your repository | you know it |
| REPOSITORY | the repository you want to connect with Lighthouse and that will send events | you know it |

> | OAUTH_TOKEN | the token used by Lighthouse to connect to your github repository | you generated one in [Creating a GitHub OAuth token](#creating-a-github-oauth-token) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| OAUTH_TOKEN | the token used by Lighthouse to connect to your GitHub repository | you generated one in [Creating a GitHub OAuth token](#creating-a-github-oauth-token) |
```

| NGROK_ENDPOINT | the ngrok endpoint connected to your local cluster ingress controller | you obtained it when [Exposing your cluster ingress controller over ngrok](#exposing-your-cluster-ingress-controller-over-ngrok) |
| LIGHTHOUSE_NAMESPACE | the namespace where Lighthouse will be installed | you can choose whatever you want |

> | HMAC_TOKEN | a secret that will be shared between Lighthouse and GitHub webhooks | you can choose whatever you want, generate a random secret is fine |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| HMAC_TOKEN | a secret that will be shared between Lighthouse and GitHub webhooks | you can choose whatever you want, generating a random secret is fine |
```

> In my case, my GitHub user name being `eddycharly`, the repository to be used in this walkthrough being `tekton-ci`, and from the steps above, the script will be this one:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, with the GitHub user name being `eddycharly`, the repository to be used in this walkthrough being `tekton-ci`, from the steps above the script will be:
```

```bash
USER="eddycharly"
REPOSITORY="tekton-ci"
OAUTH_TOKEN="933b201f7b61fd82210786d715716e4a4c88ba72"
NGROK_ENDPOINT="683b6874e9b9.ngrok.io"
LIGHTHOUSE_NAMESPACE="tools"
# this will generate a random token
HMAC_TOKEN=$(LC_CTYPE=C tr -dc 'A-F0-9' < /dev/urandom | head -c42)
```

> Please run the script above with your specific informations before continuing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please run the script above with your specific details before continuing.
```

tektoncontroller:
  dashboardURL: 'http://tekton-dashboard.127.0.0.1.nip.io/'
EOF
```

This will install Lighthouse in your cluster in the namespace of your choice.

Now Lighthouse is running, run the command below to create an ingress rule to Lighthouse:

```bash
kubectl apply -n $LIGHTHOUSE_NAMESPACE -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: extensions/v1beta1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: hook
spec:
  rules:
  - host: $NGROK_ENDPOINT
    http:
      paths:
      - backend:
          serviceName: hook
          servicePort: 80
EOF
```

At this point, Lighthouse should be running in your cluster, an ingress rule redirecting traffic from ngrok to Lighthouse should be setup, and ngrok should forward all traffic to your local cluster ingress controller.

## Configuring Lighthouse

Configuring Lighthouse is done through two configuration files `config.yaml` and `plugins.yaml`.

`config.yaml` contains the configuration used by Lighthouse and `plugins.yaml` contains the configuration related to plugins.

Configuring Lighthouse can be tricky, one approach is store config files in a git repository and use `config-updater` plugin to update the configuration when something changes in the repository.

> While this works i'm not a big fan of this approach, in this walkthrough you will manage the config files yourself, there are plenty of simpler solutions for managing them, especially when using helm as a deployment tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this walkthrough you will manage the config files yourself, there are plenty of simpler solutions for managing them, especially when using helm as a deployment tool.
```

        skip-unknown-contexts: false
      merge_method: {}
      queries:
        - labels:
            - approved
          missingLabels:
            - do-not-merge
            - do-not-merge/hold
            - do-not-merge/work-in-progress
            - needs-ok-to-test
            - needs-rebase
          repos:
            - $USER/$REPOSITORY
EOF
```

```bash
kubectl apply -n $LIGHTHOUSE_NAMESPACE -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: plugins
data:
  plugins.yaml: |
    approve:
      - lgtm_acts_as_approve: true
        repos:
          - $USER/$REPOSITORY
        require_self_approval: true
    blunderbuss: {}
    cat: {}
    cherry_pick_unapproved: {}
    config_updater:
      gzip: false
      maps: {}
    external_plugins: {}
    heart: {}
    label:
      additional_labels: null
    owners: {}
    plugins:
      $USER/$REPOSITORY:
      - approve
      - trigger
    requiresig: {}
    sigmention: {}
    size:
      l: 0
      m: 0
      s: 0
      xl: 0
      xxl: 0
    slack: {}
    triggers: []
    welcome:
      - message_template: Welcome
EOF
```

Those two files are enough to get Lighthouse running in the context of this walkthrough.

> However, you can tweak the files content to get the behaviour that suits your needs, please refer to the documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, you can tweak the content to get the behaviour that suits your needs, please refer to the documentation.
```

Next step is to configure GitHub to send events for your repository to Lighthouse.

## Configuring GitHub to send events to Lighthouse

To configure GitHub to send events to Lighthouse, you need to add the Lighthouse endpoint in the webhooks configuration of your repository.

You will need to go in the repositoy `Settings`, under the `Webhooks` tab, click the `Add webhook` button, fill in the form and click the `Add webhook` button:
- `Payload URL`: set it to the https `ngrok` endpoint under `/hook` path
- `Content type`: should be `application/json`
- `Secret`: this is the `HMAC_TOKEN` environment variable you configured when [preparing your environement](#preparing-your-environment) (run `echo $HMAC_TOKEN` if you generated randomly)
- `Which events would you like to trigger this webhook?`: select the `Send me everything` option

![Configuring GitHub webhook](./walkthrough-lighthouse-webhook.png)

## Configuring Lighthouse jobs

Lighthouse jobs are configured using a centralized approach where jobs are defined in the `config.yaml` file.

> There are mainly two categories of jobs `presubmits` that run against pull requests and `postsubmits` that run against pushes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two main categories of jobs: `presubmits` that run against pull requests, and `postsubmits` that run against pushes.
```

> The `config.yaml` contains `presubmits` and `postsubmits` jobs definitions for every repositories that send notifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `config.yaml` contains `presubmits` and `postsubmits` job definitions for every repository that sends notifications.
```

                    steps:
                      - name: ls-al
                        image: ubuntu
                        script: |
                          #!/usr/bin/env bash
                          ls -al \$(workspaces.source.path)
    # this is where postsubmit jobs are defined
    postsubmits: {}
    # the configuration below doesn't change
    branch-protection:
      orgs: {}
      protect-tested-repos: true
    deck:
      spyglass: {}
    gerrit: {}
    github:
      LinkURL: null
    owners_dir_excludes:
      default: null
      repos: null
    plank: {}
    pod_namespace: $LIGHTHOUSE_NAMESPACE
    prowjob_namespace: $LIGHTHOUSE_NAMESPACE
    push_gateway:
      serve_metrics: false
    sinker: {}
    tide:
      context_options:
        from-branch-protection: true
        required-if-present-contexts: []
        skip-unknown-contexts: false
      merge_method: {}
      queries:
        - labels:
            - approved
          missingLabels:
            - do-not-merge
            - do-not-merge/hold
            - do-not-merge/work-in-progress
            - needs-ok-to-test
            - needs-rebase
          repos:
            - $USER/$REPOSITORY
EOF
```

> **NOTES:** the Lighthouse tekton controller listens in the deployed namespace so `pod_namespace` and `prowjob_namespace` must be set to the namespace where Lighthouse was deployed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**NOTES:** the Lighthouse Tekton controller listens in the deployed namespace so `pod_namespace` and `prowjob_namespace` must be set to the namespace where Lighthouse was deployed.
```

## Lighthouse running jobs when opening a pull request

> Pull requests opened on your repository will now send events to Lighthouse, Lighthouse will trigger the `PipelineRun`s defined in the `presubmit` jobs for the given repository (you can browse the Tekton Dashboard at `http://tekton-dashboard.127.0.0.1.nip.io/`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pull requests opened on your repository will now send events to Lighthouse, Lighthouse will trigger the `PipelineRun`s defined in the `presubmit` jobs for the given repository. You can browse the Tekton Dashboard at `http://tekton-dashboard.127.0.0.1.nip.io/`.
```

![PipelineRun triggered by Lighthouse](./walkthrough-lighthouse-pipelinerun.png)

**The job status will be reported to GitHub**

![Job status report](./walkthrough-lighthouse-report.png)

**Once all jobs succeed Lighthouse can merge your pull request**

Posting `/approve` in the pull request comments will add the `approved` label to the pull request and Lighthouse will merge the PR.

> **Different plugins bring different functionnalities**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Different plugins bring different functionality**
```

> The Lighthouse functionnalities are plugin driven. You can add/remove functionnalities by changing the `plugins.yaml` file, configuring plugins and enabling them for individual repositories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Lighthouse functionality is plugin driven. You can add/remove functionality by changing the `plugins.yaml` file, configuring plugins and enabling them for individual repositories.
```

> You can read more about the Lighthouse configuration options on [Lighthouse GitHub page](https://github.com/jenkins-x/lighthouse).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can read more about the Lighthouse configuration options on the [Lighthouse GitHub page](https://github.com/jenkins-x/lighthouse).
```

## Cleaning up

Delete the GitHub Oauth token you created for this walkthrough.

Remove the webhooks from your GitHub repository.

> Turn of the ngrok tunnel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Turn off the ngrok tunnel.
```
